Spde03.txt
==========

Exported: March 11, 2026

----------------------------------------

SUMMARY

This text details the mathematical construction of the **stochastic integral** within the context of **infinite-dimensional vector spaces**, specifically focusing on **Banach and Hilbert spaces**. It establishes a foundational theory by first defining the **Bochner integral** and introducing notions of **strong and weak measurability**, noting that these concepts converge when working with **separable spaces**. The author systematically develops the theory of **martingales** and **conditional expectations** in these abstract settings, ultimately deriving a specialized **Wiener-Itô isometry**. A critical component of this derivation is the introduction of **Hilbert-Schmidt operators**, which serve as the necessary framework for mapping noise increments between different Hilbert spaces while maintaining finite energy. Overall, the source serves as a rigorous pedagogical guide for transitioning from classical real-valued calculus to the more complex realm of **stochastic evolution equations**.

Keywords: Bochner integral, Strong measurability, Banach spaces, Conditional expectation, Hilbert-Schmidt operators

CONTENT

So I guess today we're a little bit boring, but it's a wrap, so you can recall something which you already know, some of the sarcastic integration of movement spaces, and there are some interesting aspects, okay, so, but mostly there's a long denial, we've already done some of the sarcastic integration of movement spaces, and maybe we'll, okay, so let's get right on, we need to define the sarcastic integral, and the first thing that we need is to define what is the martingale of the process that takes place in a general game. So we have the vector space, and we have the martingale property, we need integration, actually conditional expectation, okay, let's start with some basics, so martingales in banner spaces. Okay, so, so we pick some real value banner space, not necessarily separable, so anything, so real is, it's not necessary, but okay, so we'll be considering the next one, vector spaces. Okay, so this is what we start with, and the first thing is we need to know how to integrate functions that take values in such a space, and that's this, the, the Bohrner integral. So, which is basically the integration theory of e-valued random functions. So e-valued, e-valued integration. Yeah, so, so given some, so given some, finite measure, I think we also see one more, but okay, finite for simplicity, mu, on some probability space, it's A, okay, so we want to define the integral in F, mu, okay, so where this integral actually takes values, so this is an integral of omega, of course, but, okay, it takes, this F takes values in the, okay, so this will be an integral that is actually a vector, okay, so for measurable constants, F is going from omega to E, okay, so if you think of the bigger degree, Rebel, flying, even if it's not good, okay, so over the average, okay, Ib, will be, not good, and after that it will be Nm, right? So it gradually gets smaller. Yes, for example, phi. Right. Now. Right. and measure the subsets a, k in the underlying then of course it is clear how to define this so the integral in this case how we do this in the classical case we would just take a linear combination of the measure of those measurable subsets times x, k and I interchange now so usually you would write it this way so x, k times mu of a, k this is a little bit how to say a of the beaten track because normally you think of this as a linear combination of the vectors x, k so this would correspond to the usual linear combination terminology order of terminology in in linear algebra ok this is perfectly ok and you can check everything now what you want to do is you want to take a limit of those step functions and this of course is possible so um so you take suitable limits and we will come back to this and the useful tool there is the bottom line equality the bottom line equality just says the bottom line equality just says ok so if I just now take the norm of this integral in this particular case then of course the triangle inequality tells me that I can estimate this from above by the ok so maybe it should be one more this is of course in this case by definition the norm of this element and then of course the triangle inequality allows me to estimate this from above homogeneity and so on and so on and the trick is now to rewrite the right hand side again as an integral so you can rewrite this as an integral over omega which is the integral over omega which is the integral over omega which is the integral over omega of the function of the norm of f can you see this though if you I mean so I will assume in this way in this case without loss of generality for this proof that a k is actually disjoint ok because otherwise you need to pass through some ok subdivision in order to get that these are actually really disjoint sets because otherwise this would not be true so the because of the because this is disjoint this implies that the norm of f in omega is either zero or it's equal to the norm of one of those so you can write this as the sum of the indicator function so this is a k times the norm of x k at most one of those omegas is non-zero and then the value of f is actually x k and then the value of f is actually x k so the norm of f is actually x k ok so this is point wise true so you need the disjointness to have this equality there but there's no loss of generality in this case ok so then you have this one and you can write you can write this interval and on the right hand side of this you are back in the Lebesgue integration theorem right so then you can take this kind of elementary step function as you know it from measure theory it from measure theory, now on the measurable space omega or the measure space omega a mu, and you can take limits there, right? Okay, so once you know that you have Cauchy sequences here, you have Cauchy sequences there, and then you can extend the integral to the closure. The question is now, what can you do? Okay, so the first thing is, which is now an example thing to define and identify the closure of, let's say, those types of elementary functions under this norm, right? Or this. And that leads to a certain norm, right? And that leads to a certain norm, right? And that leads to a certain norm, right? And that leads to a notion of measurability. And, well, the main point is that I want to realize them, so I need, I want to invoke here some kind of Cauchy sequence property, so I need to write any function as a limit of such elementary step functions, okay? So, this is something which we call strongly measurable, f is strongly measurable, so this is the definition, I can just write it as the point of limit of some step functions, I would need it actually only new. Almost everywhere, there are now, let's say, variants of this definition, of course, this could depend, of course, on the measure u, but, okay, so if you could also define it independently, you just require that this is conversions holds everywhere, but this is not the point. So, the conversion should, oh, I forgot about this, of course, the conversions now is taken in. So, in e, right, if this could come along in e, I should write it, right, strong conversions in e, did I forget something, s, of course, fn of the type, of this type, this is one condition. So, this leads to... This is the analogue of measurability, so you get something, oh, sorry, maybe here, if we can have, there's no, maybe if we just get a chair, if we have room, and then, okay, so we have this. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. This one, blah, blah, blah, blah, okay, so this is the kind of measurability that we need, I'll comment on this in a minute, why I emphasize this a little bit, and then, of course, we need that this integral is finite, right, because otherwise you don't know whether this is actually converting at all, right, I mean, this could be infinite and you don't know, of course, this makes sense, if this would be infinite, but then you don't, cannot ensure that we are pushing from the property of the proximity into this, okay, so this means that you need that this is finite, okay, so I think this is an obvious requirement, and, well... The point is now, what is actually strongly measurable, yeah, how large is the class, and there is actually something which is really new in infinite dimensions, but actually it's only for those who are interested in pathological functional analysis, so we are doing non-pathological functional analysis, which means that for us, this will not be an issue where we mention that or not, okay, so as you might already guess, I'm talking about strongly measurability, and there's also weakly measurability, that's true, so that's a remark, so, right, so the main issue is that in general, this is not true. No, yes? No, no. No, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no, no. It is not true that if I get a mapping, that if f such a mapping into a Banach space, if it is more measurable in the usual sense. So it's measurable in the sense that well, of course, I take the ball of the sigma algebra here and the sigma algebra a. So this is measurable. This implies that I can approximate f, like in the final dimension of k is by such step. It's not true in general. Okay. This implies that f can be approximated by functions of the type. And then, of course, we have a problem, right? Because we cannot, let's say, get this integral. Because as you remember, this is the call for the big integration theory. So we only find the big for any measurable function. Let's say non-negative measurable function by taking limits of intervals of elementary step functions. Right. Invoking theory and convergence. And actually . This is not true in general. Otherwise, you cannot get this. Yeah, so the only implication that you get is that such a function in particular is weakly measurable. So the only implication that you get is that such a function in particular is weakly measurable. In the sense that, so, not only that such an f, so if f has this measurability, it is in particular so called weakly measurable, which is yet another notion of measurability. So, but only that such a function f is weakly measurable. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. And weakly measurable means that for any continuous linear functional, okay, so for any l, let's say, in the E prime. So E prime is the space of all continuous linear functions on the on the Banach space. So it's very fine. It's a vector space. It's actually also complete. one and so on so all continuous linear functionals yeah i define this and introduce these notions in the appendix so on elementary don't think about it too much just take it for granted okay so take for any continuous linear functional that the mapping omega is mapped onto l of f yeah so i can now apply pointwise then f of omega is an element in e so i can apply the linear function to it i get something which is re-evaluated and now i can talk about measurability in the usual sense okay so that this is a measure okay so for all oh okay so this is a weak measurability i'm actually not quite sure at the moment whether this already implies this kind of measure certainly not this one okay don't ask me so probably you can look at that later on we don't need it because we have a nice theory namely um so so we have a result that isn't for us that you can forget about it forget about weak and strong measurability right away um after that we mentioned that so there's a so-called um if i have um a separable value it's um a function then weak measurability implies mapping sorry if i have a separate valued week weekly measurable mapping then this is also strongly measurable so i can organize integration okay so unless i keep necessary it's efficient when necessary yeah um so this is actually a kind of a so this is actually what you can get from the definition so if you have a strongly measurable if you have a quotient sequence of elementary step functions converging to f um because they they are finitely valued the only thing that you can get is something which is separately more so a necessary and sufficient condition that the method f is strongly measurable is that it is weakly measurable and separately okay that does it for us because we are working on separable universe basically anyway in the end so we can forget about these structures so i i hope it's clear for you what means separately valued so it means the range of so separately valued that means the range the f of omega is a several separable subspace so it contains a confident subset of q so it contains a confident subset of q okay that's the uh proof and then of course no of course so in particular if the separable itself is separate from the whole range the whole range possible range of values is separable itself yes for example i mean the interval rd uh but also lp spaces over identity a little less small lp so everything that comes into a format and so everything that comes into furniture and also our and so everything that comes into our aujourdiou the to mind is separate. What is not separate, for example, is, do I have a good example at the moment? Of course you can put here now some notary measure here, or such that... Well, no, that's not true, it's not as long as the sigma algebra has come to be generated, which is the case here. But of course you can think of something, a measure of a subspace that is not countable in general, and then of course you can construct Lp spaces which are actually not separate. There's something in the context of continuous functions actually, but I don't have a good example. Certainly the Bioshock's theory tells us if I take continuous functions on... bounded subsets, then I get a separable space, but there's something... maybe another space is something like this, it's a small number. Okay, anyway, so these Lp spaces are always variable. This is why we do this. Okay, so in particular if it's separable, then... every... weekly... measurable... per mapping... is also a strong... is already... is also a strong measure. Okay, so this is one thing that you should keep somewhere in the back, because sometimes it could show up unfortunately. But it will not play a further role. I've just mentioned here once, yeah? And the message is, as long as everything is separable, you are safe. Okay? Okay. Right. Then some obvious notation, I will not recall everything, so something like Lp... script Lp omega... a... mu... ayah... I should introduce this, so... Right, so... So far, of course, all those spaces, which always means... are deep... are valued... and now we look... we add this range, the possible range... of mappings... by this... by this notation, right? So that's the usual notation. And then, of course, you can also think of Helski going to... occurrence classes... and so on and so on. Is there a question? No, I just asked if we do a proof of the practice theory. For... No. Yeah. No proof. No proof. She just told me that's really good. So, yeah, there's no proof. Proof C in textbook. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. See, textbook on function analysis. But I think you can live without understanding the proof anyway. Okay? The only thing that you should be aware is this kind of... Thank you. Okay. Thank you. Okay. So, yeah, so the notation is also clear. And then I can extend the Pochner integral to all the strongly measurable functions or in a separately webbed case to all measurable functions on... There's no difference. So... Ah, yeah, maybe I should mention this. Okay. So then... So the... And we have to... So, the... And we have to... I have to say... Okay. Okay. Of course you also know then that, so if you take a, maybe I should mention this, I already mentioned this, but I will recall this, so in particular, so we have three different types of measurability, right, so the classical one, then strong and weak measurability, right, and in the separable case, all three are the same. Yeah, properties of the Boffner integral. Well, we have the Boffner inequality also, of course, in the limit, right, I mentioned that once again, because this is a key issue here. So that's the Boffner inequality. Yeah, and then we have the, and then we have the, I need this, also in the case of stochastic integration, so we apply some continuous linear operator in the vector spaces, so both should be, so f should be another one, so have a Bama space. Then, you can apply the linear operator to the Bohm integral, like the mu, and interchange it actually with the Bohm integral, which is somehow reasonable, but very constructionally. Yeah, so, some of these conclusions, all of that, namely that you have the linearity, I skip this, another thing that we also need is the fundamental theorem of calculus, so, if f is c1, c1 function, taking values in the Bohm space, in the Bama space, one can know what that is, so we can differentiate this guy with respect to the parameter in the interval a, b, and the limit exists in the Bohm space, in the Bama space only, and is, again, continuous, so that's already fine, we can, we could relax this, but okay, so if we have this one, then the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the it it it it that that Of course, S should be in the end. Okay, once we have that, we can, of course, define expectations of evaluated random variables, right? Because expectations is nothing else but integrals, right? So we have checked this. Once we have integrals, expectations, we are going to assume that... If I apply the mathematical expectation to something which is a random variable taking values in a banner space, then this is defined in the sense of... Then I can pass on to conditional expectations. Of a banner space value strongly measurable in the variables. Or just measurable if I assume that the space is... And there you see how it works now. That is really, let's say, a good approach to... Let's say, we find the Bochler integral via approximations of step functions. Step mapping, so piecewise. Piecewise is another way. So let X be now... Yeah, so from now on I will... Fix some probability space. So let X be a random variable. And an A0 being a sub-signal algebra. Then... There exists... A unique... Unique, uniquely determined... Then the variables are... Unique, uniquely determined... Unique, uniquely determined... Unique, uniquely determined... Unique, uniquely determined... Then the variables are... well, this is E, of course. X0 I'm going to save for a multi-space taking values from E I'm sorry this is unnecessary so we'll just define at the same way express but now smaller sigma sigma okay okay okay so I can find something like this satisfying the usual orthogonality or smoothing condition so such that the interval of any measure of a subset in A naught in the smaller sigma algebra of x naught is equal to the same of x, the same interval or the same domain or the same number of sets of x so this is what we call A naught, so this is as you know one of the equivalent definitions of the conditional expectation in the real case now ok ok so this is uniquely determined so it has the same unique properties as in finite dimensions of course as in the classical real value case and so then we can talk about this x naught as we can give it a notion, a notation, the usual one to be expected so x naught is called x so the conditional expectation of course of x given A naught and we write ok oh but the other way this is given already um and we have to work on equality namely so the norm of the conditional expectation is less than the conditional expectation of the norm and now since this is a real value when a variable this is the usual condition expectation we have defined so far ok ok so how do you find it or how do you prove this existence so it's not possible via that's actually a good way good opportunity well ok so the first thing is remember how we define conditional expectation we have two constructions one was the US based construction the other way was the the the wave area that around an incoherent relative um ok so this is the equation ok so Hilbert space is not possible yeah because actually you don't have any so how does it work so do you remember so um we define conditional expectation as the orthogonal projection of a random variable of the space subspace of the corresponding theoretical uh A naught measurable and there is but to extend it we need monotonicity yeah so something like this and this doesn't make sense anymore right in general so we don't have an ordered structure on a general banner space also not on a Hilbert space yeah so this is everything that is alluding to point wise ordered structures something like this this is not in general given so in particular you will see it in a minute we cannot extend the sub martingale super martingale super martingale property in general in a random variable so ok so this is something which doesn't work and actually uh we could extend the well what's with the random nicotin derivative that's also not clear but ok so there would be a way actually but uh ok so I will not fill the corner of this actually we use this actually no doesn't work but I will skip that so we do it with bare hands ok so we just can find this guy with bare hands means um so proof this is only a sketch but this makes sense to give some insight into the construction in general because this is actually a problem which is not so obvious ok you start with uh elementary random e-valued random variables or something like this as before and uh well I think this is now clear how we will do this um again a k pair was disjoint as in the previous discussion um yeah you can yeah you do it exactly how you would do it in the um um with a bottom interval because you see you can now of course the conditional expectation should be somewhere linear so you can pull it out of that and you know what the conditional expectation of this real valued indicator function given here is ok so that's it ok so so we find the conditional expectation of x given here exactly as we would do this if this would be the trivial c-module the bottom integral so we just replace the integral of this one with the conditional expectation ok ok ok matter and they don't need to be perverse disjoint for this definition matter case. And now using, but now what we did, there was disjoint because then we apply Wochner's inequality. So we prove this inequality on the fly if you want so. So this implies that in particular we have that this is, I think you can immediately see this, lower equal to the expectation of, lowering to the sum of the norm of x k, the triangle inequality and then we have the conditional expectation. This one, and then we can, since these are perverse disjoint, actually we don't need this here. No, we don't. No, we need this, we need this. In the final step, so we can write this as the conditional expectation of norm of x, which is a real value, not a variable, right? Conditional value of x is true, okay? So this is true and then I think you can guess how this, this stand it to a general case, as one of the Kusch's masters that you'd like to see. Approximating vai vay. Approximator in English covering the The original ability to scope, approximately 15 years. Approximating. Approximation. It came, ok so it's more or less, you know, so if you everything if you work everything out is much work, but okay, it's erstenities of on Demis vencam but again, we just wanted to see where's the criticality. it's somehow straightforward okay yeah I skipped the next thing so you can see that many of the elementary of many things concerning condition expectations carry over to the to this general case so I skipped this, also special cases now we can move on to the condition of the martingale because we have condition expectations now so we say that an invariant of the case of process you can also think of it in a discrete time or any time partially but okay so as usual we want to consider as index of the process something like this yeah it's called martingale of course we skip we fix the probability space martingale with with with spectrism-given filtration then yeah if if if if if if if So, we should have bottom-line loop quality, of course we should have adaptedness, and the crucial quality, of course, is the expectation of MT, given MS is equal to MS if S is lower than MT. Yeah, of course. So, the rate of MS. Right. So, in particular, you can apply now any continuous linear function to this, and get that any continuous linear function of an E-level MTL is actually a real MTL, because it can just change the linear mapping with the conditional expectation, and that is present. So, how is the martingale with respect to A2? Or, which I continuously need the continuity, right? Because of the properties. The properties and the definition of the document. Okay. Right. And so, there are some examples, in particular, if we take a QDN process that we discussed last week, and this will be a martingale. Yeah, maybe I should mention this. Maybe I should mention at least this one. So, of course, the obvious natural example is our QDN process. It's like, for example, W3. Okay. And so, W3, what do we get through the influences? And... A2. With respect to the concentration A-T. Let's get this definition. That was a slight generalization. Um... in the definition, but in particular what we have then is the increments of that process which are on the time frame to the increments right to t will be independent of h so then this will apply to w which is an 18 minute process yeah so yeah maybe first showing you that we have the Wochner integral okay so we assume that so the canonical state space of our Wiener process last week was actually the Hilbert space u right so this is now our Wanner space and so instead of looking at the 1-norm I'm just looking at the 2-norm which is a bit better yeah and this is a good exercise actually okay so to compute this what I'm doing is I use the canonical representation of the Q-Wiener process remember so I can represent this as an infinite series possibly infinite series of eigenfunctions of the corresponding underlying covariance operator which was which is a finite trace and corresponding eigenvalues lambda k which are necessarily non-negative because the covariance operator is actually positive definite positive semi-definite and then we can multiply this with a family of independent Brownian motions right so this was the canonical representation that we have looked at so maybe I should write it this way because of course this sum would also be finite I avoid this a little bit more this one okay I'm okay so right now so if it's finite then the lambda k's are all zero except finitely minimum right now the essential thing is now that you can expand this in a series you have to justify this by approximation but okay so let us no maybe maybe let's do it one step easier so I could write this using possible approximation because this is a this is as well you have a choice you can do it this way or the other way I think I'm not quite sure what I did so let me skip this okay okay let's just use Parseval's relation this is the scalar product u so we can express the square norm of any element in u by this infinites by the squares sums of the Fourier coefficients right the abstract Fourier coefficients of this to the complete orthonormal system of u and now you just see that if you take the if you compute the Fourier coefficients of this one these are exactly the Fourier coefficients so this is nothing else but maybe I should show this here so if you insert this into the scalar product then because of the orthogonality right this is real valued we can put it out of the scalar product and these are orthogonal to e l unless I'm k is equal to l so everything is zero here in this sum in the scalar product of e l just picks the corresponding Fourier coefficients of the f coordinate so this is number l times beta k squared yeah nothing else okay so I end up with this series yes but there's still a norm here because here we have a bounding motion it's that kind of norm here so I have this sum and the series of this one so I can just okay so the series of this one the square of this one is just under l and then I have beta l of t squared okay so the bounding motion squared at time t now I can just take Forbini interchange those summation and integration so I end up with the sum of lambda l times the expectation of the bounding motion beta l which is equal to square which is equal to t right independent of l so I get nothing else but t times this series but the sum of the eigenvalues is nothing else but the trace of q okay so this is t times the trace of q okay so that's the usual identity will be the square of the q in a process at time t and yeah the corresponding covariance of t and the trace as a functional or many operators will also play a role then later on in the um in a stochastic integration okay okay so we have this one um that certainly implies that this is quantifiable the indefiniteness is by definition that this is q in a process with respect to at but at could be of course larger and then of course the usual thing is to verify that we have the corresponding martingale property we proceed as usual as as in the case of the classical Brownian motion if you remember how we proved that the Brownian motion itself is a martingale well what we did is we write this conditional expectation as the conditional expectation of the increment yeah so this is the same thing as you know so the factorization of what's over what's over e-valued random variables and then because of the independence that's also true so everything of this type generalize of the anything of these properties like of conditional expectation generalize to the e-valued case this is then the the total expectation of independence this is by definition the zero vector okay so that's exactly the same formally the same proof but of course it's completely different reasoning right yeah so that proves that q martingale in particular sorry a q in a process in particular martingale okay yeah as already mentioned sub-martingale super-martingale property is not so clean it's not immediate it requires additional structure in the Heidelberg space I forget on the Banach space I will skip that and the main thing that we need actually is Dupes maximal inequality which holds in this formulation subtlety it's a little bit different it's not different but you know the maximal inequality for Dupes for real-valued holds for any non-negative real-valued sub-martingale okay sub-martingale doesn't make sense but you actually don't need this so you can just go through the same proof for martingales and for martingales we have it okay so you can take the proof of Dupes maximal inequality in the for the martingale case and then carry it over and you get the following theory and so you get the Dupes maximal inequality for martingales so leg empty you write continuous martingale 18 martingale well actually the martingale the situation doesn't show up actually in the statement so you could drop it then yeah the alpino of the supremum of the martingale of the norm of the martingale let's say up to time capital T one of the piece of the alpino of the supremum of this one is lower or equal than p p divided by p minus one times yeah that's also exactly the same exponent here but then the alpino also works inside so this is capital T to power p times okay so this of course holds for all p larger than one of course also the other version here one version also holds but let's skip this because we only need actually later on we will only I think we need the case p which is right yeah in particular this implies that if you have a sequence of martingales converging with respect to this norm then they convert if you have a sequence of continuous martingales converging with respect to this norm then they converge this continuous continues uniformly on any finite intervals on the interval from zero to capital T for example and that means that you can get a limited continuous version right so that gives you completeness of the spaces of martingales which are of p bounded for p larger than one okay so that's the main conclusion and we define the space so we don't have as much notation actually I think we don't need this and if we need this I can just recall this at that point but maybe take it as a notation and a remark so this implies that the space could be empty capital T I mean it will appear actually next week so all continuous martingales zero T there's no independence here notation of dependence on E we have to add this if you want to be clear about this continuous capital T martingale which is lp bounded for which the norm is defined to be for example like this one for which this one is bounded is a bound space for E larger than one okay and so and the Hilbert space also wait a moment wait a moment wait a moment this is not this is not true unless yeah this is actually this is not true unless so there's only a Hilbert space if if this one is what's going on in the product space so I should keep this I mean I'll just erase it so okay okay or maybe I should write it to Hilbert space if E is in Hilbert space but basically it's not the same yeah um yeah so let me tell you this I forgot about the range the last range was that of the cubic matrices so it should be an invariant so this is E of course this is another E of course this is an interpretation um so it's a Hilbert space if P is equal to 2 and P is a bound space okay okay okay okay right so this is all we need um then we can continue with the um stochastic integral and um that's completely analogous yeah no that's not the ultimate truth um yeah okay I want to recognize what is actually analogous and what um to the um real value to a finite dimensional case um right um okay um so basically we call in the finite dimensional case the stochastic interval was defined basically in three steps and you will recognize the three steps today as well so we have first defined for elementary processes and then we invoke some kind of Vinaito isometry that's now a little bit more tricky you have already seen this in the example that's why I made the example quite detailed but once we have this kind of properly formulated Vinaito isometry then we can pass through the limit and then we can localize in the final step as we would localize it in the final motion case so that's essentially the thing so the crucial step is in the correct formulation of the Vinaito isometry and that actually there is no in general no Vinaito isometry unless you are on a Hilbert space okay okay so we want to be I think it's clear what we want to do so we fix a QVM process you love it , so we fix a QVT and want to define something like this for example from zero to t and this should be valid in another Hilbert space right so in a finite dimensional case there was not much of an issue so because this was rp this was rd in general so that just meant we were switching dimensions with the help of the corresponding matrix-valued mappings but now we have to exchange those matrix-valued mappings by linear operatives from u to h in order to map the increment of the u-valued QVina process which is an element u to something which is an h okay okay okay first step integration of elementary processes yeah it's clear mine's a little bit far okay so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so so okay yeah so if I am going to be measurable with respect to ATM maybe I should a Wiener process with respect to FT now so this is FT this is of course increasing what else do I need yeah so actually I have chosen this already in such a way without lots of general so it's easy to go to 0 okay it's actually important yeah okay I should say what is phi m a priori phi m is the linear mapping from B to H of all the linear so the space of all the linear mapping is from U to H is denoted by L of U H okay so once we are given this one we can find another one How much time do I need? okay I'm not sure well it's going to take a while what I need to see is how can I just as it says the Luc slime how do I get e is the energy yes relax so this is for r, w, t, and plus 1, and for t of course we need a process at the end, which is contained, so we just look at t for r, t, and you have to interpret this as the action of the linear operator of this increment, right? So this increment now is, in fact I mentioned this was multiplication, if you remember, but this is now in general mapping, we map, we apply the mapping, phi m of omega, for fixed omega, to this increment, to this element in u, and we have to include this in h, so this is how I'm going to do it, so guess what I'm going to do. Yeah, so multiplication. Multiplication is exchanged in the general case by applying linear matrix, that's it, okay? Sorry, as in total we get something which is also linear, but linear now with respect to the structure on these elementary processes, of course, so... So the linear method is, let's call it capital I for integral, so it's defined as, in the final example case, on the space of elementary processes of this type. Okay. Yeah, let's call this... Let's start over again. Into, and you can prove this exactly in the same way as in the phi-dimensional case, that this is actually mapping into the space of continuous. Square root of... Monty Nielsen's area, t, with respect to the filtration area, t, okay? So there we are, we use this once, at least this notation. And since, now the point is, since this is now a Hilbert space, this is now a Hilbert space as well. Okay. Yeah? Um... Okay, um... The next step is to identify something like the unit equalizing the tree. And, well, I give you the final result, but this is actually an issue. So if I would have here, for example, marking phi or take values in a general banner space, then there will be no isometry in general. Okay, I will try to drop some remark on this. Okay, so I'll just give you now the way how you can actually derive the binar isometry, but that's already with some assumptions that are already made. So basically, you already have seen that, and that's actually not the honest way to introduce this. But okay, I will do it anyway. So, you see, we have seen that the Kiel-Wiener process in the L2 norm, which we would like to control here somewhere, actually is in a natural way linked to the trace class operator of the underlying comparator operator. So it's somewhere. And so there's a general... So the space of trace class operators, of course, is not yet the Hilbert space. So how do we get some reasonable Hilbert space there? Well, it's done by passing to the square of the trace class operator. So we can define something like this. And that is actually the so-called Hilbert-Schmidt operator. So if Q is trace class, then the square of the trace class operator is Hilbert-Schmidt, whatever that is. And so this is somehow how the Hilbert-Schmidt operators naturally show up here. And we'll see it later in the computation. But to be, let's say, to introduce these operators a priori, I'll just define them. Somehow, out of nowhere, I will define all Hilbert-Schmidt operators. Okay. Okay. Definition. So an operator out. Okay. So an operator out, which is an operator from U to H, exactly that, what we want to have at the end as an integrator in front of the noise term, is called Hilbert-Schmidt. If the following is true, the operator of the following known, one should pay attention that this 2 is actually, this is not a typo. The 2 is not in the exponent, but it's a subindex. Okay. So we go. So I define now a known, namely this known. So what would, I saw the square of a known, of course. I take any complete also known system, and I apply the, so I take any complete also known system of the Hilbert space U. I apply my linear operator to this. Okay. I get something which is an H. And I sum all these knowns squared up from . Okay. If this is fine, this is certainly well defined. It could be infinite, but it's called, the operator is called Hilbert-Schmidt, if this is finite. Okay. So if this is true for one, and then you can prove that it's actually independent of the chosen complete also known system, which always, it's true then for all, for any, this is not, of course, any, complete also known system of U. That's an easy exercise. Yeah. If, so for one, hence all, complete also known systems of U. Okay. Right. So let's go to the space of all these Hilbert-Schmidt operators. So this space actually is linear. You can prove that this is a linear relationship. So it's definitely a linear relationship. Okay. So the linear space of all the Hilbert-Schmidt operators. Right. So let's go to the space of all the Hilbert-Schmidt operators. Okay. So let's go to the space of all the Hilbert-Schmidt operators. So and unfortunate thing is then, that this space is actually again a Hilbert space. Huh? Then, L2, A so the space of all the Hilbert-Schmidt operators is again a Hilbert space. A real of course. With respect to all the following inner products, products, so if you take now two operators, A and B, in the scalar products of the space of Hilbert-Schmidt operators, just define, well again, fix any complete orthogonal system of U, and then just apply both operators to the given vector, okay, let's say, just look at the H norm of the relevant object, which is basically the scalar product of each of the terms here. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. This is something which will help us a lot, because a priori, we started in the integration only with linear operators, let's say continuous linear operators from U to H, but the space of continuous bounded linear operators from U to H is actually non-Hilbert space, it's actually not even separable. Well, even if U and H is separable, so this is a beast, this space, this is a very bad space, with the Bohmian operators, so you can do not much about it, concerning what we have in mind, in the case of integrations, in the case of analysis, in this space. The space of Hilbert-Schmidt operators, instead, is a much, much smaller space, it is actually, it's, first of all, it's a Hilbert space, as you have seen, and it's actually also separable, right? Now, if U is, actually, we only need that U sample, okay? So, in some sense, we have closed the hierarchy, right? So, we are going from some separable pair of separable Hilbert spaces, then we look at the linear operators, if we respect Hilbert-Schmidt, we have, again, in something which is a separable Hilbert space, and then we could, in principle, we could iterate, we don't do this. Okay, so this is the, this is an important... important thing, you will see, I hope you will see this in a moment, that is the only natural way, now, to establish a Hilbert, a Wiener-Hitler, it's not true, okay? So, you know, so I've made some comments concerning... the Hilbert-Schmidt norm, and the main thing that I want to state is, where is it? It's lost, where's the statement, actually? Okay, yeah, so, you have the following, so for this definition of the stochastic integral, the node in instruments, okay, ok... So, we have the... the Mantel-Hitler-Schmidt Within a wheel, then one... The Mantel-Hitler-Schmidt within a wheel, then one... Okay, 24th number, and 24th number, what is true, that in Performance Inverse encounters, always has the same advantage, then the normal mentor, the neutral spread, the normal mentor, but it's true, It also doesn't have to be aLEaW paru tV?? Entonces también tengo este, ¿Como también hay que dar una crossing afuera a fond Junior? of the logistic integral is the Hilbert norm squared under the expectation is equal to the expectation of the integral of the yeah, so Hilbert split norm of the following operator phi s increment applied to the square root of q to h so this is the related okay, I have here some new norm appears if I compute the h norm of the suggestive integral yeah okay yeah, in particular this yeah, in particular in particular we have that we have that we can establish the assometry so the so the so the so the the corresponding norm in the space of continuous martingale's h valued f t adapted l2 bounded l2 bounded square is equal to square is equal to the expectation of the integral of the capital T and then so once you have this then it's clear right so then you can now consider Cauchy sequence with respect to this norm on the right hand side we get Cauchy sequences here this is a complete space so you can take limits and the limit then is the suggestive integral with respect to the limiting process here okay okay now yeah this is a little bit so this is actually if you it's just simple algebra of course but there's a lot of topologies a lot of scalar problems going in so we'll show you how this actually works in the last minutes um um should we do this yeah okay let's do this okay so I'll try to move this out um um um um um um um um um okay um um um um um um um um um um um um um that was a general LAT let's see well that's then if I am time so I introduce some short annotations so delta m will be nothing else but the corresponding increment of the Q in a process yeah so I use w T m for rho Yeah, and if you ever come across something like this, the first thing that you automatically should do, write this as a scalar product and multiply it out bilinearly. Okay, so you can always write this next to sum. All right, say m and m. No, k and o. Oh, m and m. And then you have the inner product. No, this is already something. If you would have here a mass base, you couldn't expand it like that. So you need this inner product somehow. Okay, so that's fine. Now, the next thing is to expand the Brownian Levena increments. Yeah, we have to do this, unfortunately. Okay, so we fix m and m here. году TS and of course, this is always application for linear networking, just something which is in u. Right? Okay? So what I'm use now is the canonical representation for bin拜拜 the process. You remember we have the series over k and series over l And we have lambda k square root of lambda l times corresponding phi m's applied to E k and phi n applied to E l. And then we have the product of the two corresponding modeling motions beta k tn plus 1 minus beta k tm times beta l tn plus 1 minus, sorry this is tn plus 1, minus beta l tn. Okay? So, now... Without loss of generality, let's say m is smaller than, okay, so we make, let's say, a discussion case by case. So, if, for example, if m is less than n, we can condition on fm, right? So... So... So... So, let's condition on fn, I think. Then the only thing that is not measurable with respect to fn is actually this increment, right? And this, then you just get by independence that this is equal to the condition. And you just get by independence that this is equal to the expectation of this increment. Sorry, this is bk. Okay? tn plus 1 minus beta k tn. Now, the rest is just measurable with respect to fn. Everything else here is actually 0, right? Because the total variable of the expectation is actually 0. so any off diagonal terms with respect to m and n actually vanish here no matter what and then we have the case m equal to n but k not equal to l what we can do is we can look at the same conditional expectation on fn and then we have a product of beta k tn is 1 minus beta k n and the same for beta l maybe I first discuss the general case now they both are independent of fk and so if k is not equal to l they are independent so I can just smuggle in the minimal filtration for example by this one put this out and because of independence then of this one by that one I get the total expectation here so this will be also 0 so that means I also get 0 for all this if m is equal to n but n to k is not equal to l and the only remaining thing is that m is equal to n and k is equal to l right? and in that case the term that shows up here then is just so everything is now the sum over k and this will be then m is equal to n so I end up with lambda k expectation of so m is equal to n k is equal to l so I end up with you see there we are so this is where the the version mid norm already is evolving in some sense right? so we have this one in the H norm and this one is then nothing else but t m plus 1 minus tm times the trace of q so I have all of all the yeah no we have the lambda q here that's true ok now the crucial step is the following ok so this is what is remaining here the crucial step is that I can put the lambda inside ok so first of all lambda is not negative so this one is equal to so of course I have to take the square root here and now phi is linear it's a linear map so I can put the scar lines on it ok so maybe I can do it right away ok but lambda k the square root of lambda k applied to the k is nothing else but applying the square root of the covariance of q in this equation so this is the same as the square root of q divided by q this is how the square root works ok so that in the end we have the sum over so let's yeah so maybe I already need to change summation and expectation from here as well last time so I have the sum over all i over functions of q of what the operator phi m applied to the square root of q applied to e k yeah I could put this outside it would be easier but this is nothing more than but the trace sorry the Hilbert-Schmidt norm of this trace so we can plug this in so what we have done here is then we can write this as the sum of the a of the a of the a of the a of the a of the a of the a of the a of the a a a of the expectation no, we have still the summation of the N so of the trace I will explain the next point always as a trace and then of course you can rewrite this as an integral so this is the basic argument so in particular you see how these arguments and there is no way around this so you have to take this it's not so much easy so that's the real truth and once you have accepted this you can continue so I think I have let's put this down now we have completed the second step now we can go to the completion there is a little bit of subtlety about the completion that I will mention discuss briefly next localization is I will not elaborate on this just take it for granted and then probably I will make it smaller mark on space and volume because so far we only need this finite trace condition I always okay so that's the final step I make because so what is the liquid in Hilbert-Schmidt and the finite trace so if I take an operator A which is Hilbert-Schmidt on U to H then this implies that let me think about it if I take the adjoint of A applied to A so the adjoint of A applied to A is A the adjoint first of all is an operator this is subtlety so the particular A is a linear operator from A to H the adjoint operator will be a linear operator from H to U it's a subtlety if you are not familiar with this it doesn't matter so usually you define starting from a linear operator the dual operator acting on dual spaces in the opposite way but invoking the recessum you can identify the dual space with the Hilbert spaces themselves and that means you can associate actually an adjoint operator but the adjoint operator I take it for granted is just the dual one via recessum tree so this is formally an operator from from H to U it will be continuous and also a Schmidt that's general nonsense now in the opposite way but we don't need this actually but what we can prove is that this operator is a finite trace so this is what this is an operator from U to U and this is a finite trace now why because well if you compute the trace of this operator you know this is nothing else A star A like to give a complete orthonormal system of U but by the definition of the adjoint I can put it here so this is actually the same as the sum of A like to A vector times the operator A over here to this one now in H now by the definition of adjoint operator here you see that this is actually a Schmidt moment of A now basically the message is if I take a Schmidt operator then A star A is a finite trace and conversely if I have a finite trace operator let's say on U I can and which is positive definite this is also positive definite by the way right it's clear I can pass over to the square root and the square root then actually is illogical ok ok let's stop here ok

